
# Problem 12: Highly divisible triangular number

[Problem page](https://projecteuler.net/problem=12)

## Problem Statement

The sequence of triangle numbers is generated by adding the natural numbers. So the 7th triangle number would be 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 = 28. The first ten terms would be: 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, 55, ...

Let us list the factors of the first seven triangle numbers:

    1: 1
    3: 1,3
    6: 1,2,3,6
  10: 1,2,5,10
  15: 1,3,5,15
  21: 1,3,7,21
  28: 1,2,4,7,14,28

We can see that 28 is the first triangle number to have over five divisors. What is the value of the first triangle number to have over five hundred divisors?

## Solution

There are three interesting ways which help make this solution more efficient. First is simply using the standard formula for the nth triangle number instead of summing all numbers from 1 to n. The second is that successive numbers, as appear in the formula for the nth triangle number, are coprime. Therefore, the number of factors of their product is the product of the number of factors of each number. Further, one of these numbers must be even, and the formula for the nth triangle number involves dividing by 2, which saves finding one power of two as a factor in that number.

The more interesting addition to this solution is in how it counts the number of factors a number has. Each number can be written as the product of primes, where each is raised to some exponent. Each factor of a number is therefore the product of a subset of those primes, with an exponent that can be as great the that exponent which that prime takes in the prime factorisation. Any prime can be excluded in determining one of the factors: in effect, multiplying by one in the place of that prime, or taking an exponent of zero. Therefore, to find the number of factors of some number, simply take the exponents of the prime factors of that number, add one to each, and determine the product.
